
\section*{Results}

\subsection*{Assessment of energy and material import unit costs}
\label{sec:results-1}

%%% brief methodology TRACE %%%


Green fuel and steel import costs seen by the model are based on an extension of
recent research by Hampp et al.,\cite{hamppImportOptions2023} who assessed the
levelised cost of energy exports for different green energy and material supply
chains from various world regions to Europe. Our selection of exporting regions
comprises all 53 coloured or dotted regions in \cref{fig:options}A. In the
TRACE optimisation model,\cite{hamppImportOptions2023} regional wind and solar
potentials are assessed based on prevailing weather conditions and land
availability while prioritising projected domestic demand. In combination with
the techno-economic modelling of the various fuel-specific supply chains stages
(\sfigref{fig:si:import-esc-scheme}), the lowest levelised supply cost for each
carrier, exporter and importer combination are determined for a reference volume
of 500~TWh~a$^{-1}$ (or 100~Mt~a$^{-1}$ of steel/HBI), thus incorporating the
trade-off between import cost and import location (\cref{fig:options}B).
Unlike domestic electrofuel synthesis in Europe, which could use captured CO$_2$
from point sources, direct air capture is assumed to be the only carbon source
of imported fuels. Concepts involving the shipment of captured CO$_2$ from
Europe to exporting regions for carbonaceous fuel synthesis or permanent
sequestration of CO$_2$ captured by direct air capture abroad are not
considered.\cite{treeenergysolutionsGreenCycle2024,fonderSyntheticMethaneClosing2024}

%%% brief methodology TRACE-PyPSA-Eur coupling %%%

The import costs for each combination of carrier, exporter and importer are then
included as supply options in the PyPSA-Eur model. Hydrogen and methane can be
imported where there are LNG terminals in operation or under construction or
where pipeline entry points exist (except for entry points from Russia). Due to
higher volatility, electricity imports are endogenously optimised, meaning that
the capacities and operation of wind and solar generation, as well as storage in
the respective exporting regions and the HVDC transmission lines, are co-planned
with the rest of the European system. Ammonia, carbonaceous fuels, and ferrous
materials are not spatially resolved in the model, assuming they can be
transported within Europe at negligible cost. Thus, their specific import
location is not determined. An import limit of 500~TWh per region for the sum of
all exports is imposed to prevent over-reliance on single exporters.

For imports of hydrogen by pipeline, North African regions offer the lowest cost
(ca.~74-88 \euro{}~MWh$^{-1}$, \sfigref{fig:si:worlmap-h2}). Importing hydrogen
by ship is substantially more expensive due to liquefaction and evaporation
losses, with a cost difference of 18\% between each vector's lowest cost
supplier (\sfigref{fig:si:isc-h2}). For hydrogen derivatives, Argentina and
Chile offer additional potential for low-cost imports, for instance,
125-132~\euro{}~MWh$^{-1}$ for Fischer-Tropsch fuels or 548-566~\euro{}~t$^{-1}$
for steel. These values are similar to those achieved in the Maghreb region.
Further notable regions include Australia and Canada. Methanol is slightly cheaper
than the Fischer-Tropsch route because it is assumed to be more flexible with a
20\% minimum part load compared to 50\% for Fischer-Tropsch
synthesis.\cite{brownUltralongdurationEnergyStorage2023} The lower process
flexibility shifts the energy mix towards solar electricity and causes higher
levels of curtailment and battery storage, increasing costs
(\sfigref{fig:si:isc-meoh-ft}). The transport costs of \ce{CH4(l)} are lower
than for \ce{H2(l)} since the liquefaction consumes less energy and individual
ships can carry more energy with \ce{CH4(l)}. Pipeline imports of \ce{CH4(g)}
were also considered, but costs were higher than for \ce{CH4(l)} shipping under
the assumption that new pipelines would have to be built or renewed.

\begin{figure}
    \fullwidthfigure{
    \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{../workflow/notebooks/20240826-z1/sensitivity-bars.pdf}
    \caption{\textbf{Potential for cost reductions with reduced sets of import options available.}
        Subsets of available import options are sorted by ascending cost
        reduction potential. \textbf{A} shows profile of total system cost
        savings. Shaded ranges show cost savings (\%) for technology
        asummptions for 2030 and 2050, in addition to the default assumptions
        for 2040. Cost savings (\%) are also shown for scenarios without crude
        steel and ammonia relocation, in addition to the default case where
        relocation is allowed. \textbf{B} shows composition and extent of
        imports in relation to total energy system costs. Percentage numbers in
        bar plot indicate the share of total system costs spent on domestic
        energy infrastructure. Alternative scenarios of this figure with higher
        and lower import cost assumptions are shown in Supplementary Figs.~13
        and 14. }
    \label{fig:sensitivity-bars}
    }
\end{figure}

\subsection*{Cost savings for fuel and material import combinations}
\label{sec:results-2}

In \cref{fig:sensitivity-bars}, we first explore the cost reduction potential of
various energy and material import options. Without energy imports, total energy
system costs add up to \bneuro{836}. By enabling imports from outside Europe and
considering all import vectors, we find a potential reduction of total energy
system costs by up to \bneuro{37}, using technology assumptions for 2040. This
corresponds to a relative reduction of 4.4\%, which remains nearly unchanged
regardless of the domestic crude steel and ammonia production relocation potential.
With more long-term (2050) or near-term (2030) technology assumptions, the cost
savings range from 3.6\% to 5.4\%, with higher cost savings achieved with
near-term technology assumptions (\cref{fig:si:technology-projection}).

For cost-optimal imports, around 77\% of these costs are used to develop
domestic energy infrastructure. The remaining 23\% are spent on importing a
volume of 50~Mt of green steel and around 1498 TWh of green energy, which is
around 13\% of the system's total energy supply (\cref{fig:import-shares}). Our
results show a cost-effective import mix consisting primarily of liquid
carbon-based fuels, hydrogen, and steel imports with small volumes of ammonia
and electricity imports.

Next, we investigate the impact of restricting the available import options to
subsets of import vectors. We find that if only hydrogen can be imported, cost
savings are reduced to \bneuro{20} (2.4\%), with pipeline-based hydrogen imports
being preferred to imports as liquid by ship. By importing a larger volume of
hydrogen as an intermediary carrier (1338~TWh instead of 576~TWh,
\sfigref{fig:si:import-shares-a}), low-cost renewable energy from abroad can
still be leveraged for the synthesis of derivative products in Europe. However,
the benefit is reduced as domestic CO$_2$ feedstocks from industrial sources are
depleted.

Conversely, when direct hydrogen imports are excluded from the available import
options, cost savings are close to the maximum with \bneuro{34} (4.1\%). This
indicates that the benefit of using domestically captured biogenic or fossil
CO$_2$ is similar to tapping into low-cost renewable resources abroad. Focusing
imports exclusively on liquid carbonaceous fuels derived from hydrogen,
i.e.~methanol or Fischer-Tropsch fuels, still achieves high cost savings of
\bneuro{31} (3.7\%), which is due to the smaller demand or variety of
applications for ammonia, methane, and steel compared to liquid carbonaceous
fuels. Thus, excluding them has a small effect on cost savings. This aligns with
the finding that restricting options to only methane, ammonia, or ferrous
material imports yields negligible to small cost savings below \bneuro{5}
(0.6\%). Negligible cost savings were also found for the direct import of
electricity as it poses more challenges for integration into the European
system.

Overall, while varying import costs within $\pm 20\%$ affects the magnitude of
attainable cost savings, the relative impact of restricting specific import
options remains broadly consistent
(\sfigref{fig:si:subsets-higher,fig:si:subsets-lower}). Likewise, using more
long-term (2050) or near-term (2030) technology assumptions do not affect the
dynamics substantially (\cref{fig:sensitivity-bars}).

\begin{figure}
    \fullwidthfigure{
    \includegraphics[width=0.58\linewidth]{../workflow/pypsa-eur/results/20240826-z1/graphics/import_shares/s_115_lvopt__imp_2050.pdf}
    \includegraphics[width=0.42\linewidth]{../workflow/pypsa-eur/results/20240826-z1/graphics/import_sankey/s_115_lvopt__imp_2050.pdf}
    \caption{\textbf{Shares of imports and domestic production by carrier, optimised import mix and trade flows.}
        \textbf{A} shows the optimised import shares by carrier for the import
        scenario with flexible carrier choice and volume, technology assumptions
        for 2040, and allowed relocation of crude steel and ammonia production.
        \textbf{B} shows the total supply for each carrier for the same
        scenario. \textbf{C} shows trade flows for the same scenario as a Sankey
        diagram. The flows are aggregated to broader regions to emphasize that
        alternative origin-destination pairs could often yield similar results.
        Import shares for further import scenarios are included in Supplementary
        Figs.~20 to 21. Steel is included in energy terms applying a factor of
        2.1 kWh~kg$^{-1}$ as released by the oxidation of iron. }
    \label{fig:import-shares}
    }
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
    \fullwidthfigure{
    \centering
    \footnotesize
    \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{../workflow/notebooks/20240826-z1/market-values-noimp.pdf} \\
    \includegraphics[width=\linewidth, trim=0cm 0cm 0cm 0cm,clip]{../workflow/notebooks/20240826-z1/market-values-imp+H2.pdf} \\
    \includegraphics[width=\linewidth, trim=0cm 0cm 0cm 0cm, clip]{../workflow/notebooks/20240826-z1/market-values-imp.pdf}
    \caption{\textbf{Comparison of domestic synthetic production costs and import costs for varying import scenarios.}
        The three panels \textbf{A, B, C} refer to different import scenarios.
        In each panel, the bar charts show the production-weighted
        average costs of domestic production of steel, hydrogen and its
        derivatives split into its cost and revenue components. These have been
        computed using the marginal prices of the respective inputs and outputs
        for the production volume of each region and snapshot. Capital
        expenditures are distributed to hours in proportion to the production
        volume. Missing bars indicate that no domestic production occured in the
        scenario, e.g.~for the case of methane where all demand is met by
        biogenic and fossil methane and no synthetic production occured
        (cf.~energy balances in Supplementary Figs.~24 to 25). All hydrogen is
        produced from electrolysis; i.e.~the model did not choose to produce
        hydrogen via steam methane reforming with or without carbon capture. For
        each bar, the yellow errorbars show the range of time-averaged domestic
        production costs across all regions. The black error bars show the range
        of import costs across all regions. The maps on the right of each panel
        relate the hydrogen production volume to the weighted cost of domestic
        hydrogen production (left colorbar). Shown scenarios use technology
        assumptions for 2040, allow crude steel and ammonia relocation, and do
        not constraint import volume in \textbf{B} and \textbf{C}. Confer Supplementary
        Fig.~22 for information on the domestic cost supply curves. Maps made with Natural Earth.}
    \label{fig:market-values}
    }
\end{figure}

\subsection*{Import dynamics for different energy carriers}
\label{sec:results-3}

%%% state results %%%

\cref{fig:import-shares}A and \cref{fig:import-shares}B outline which carriers are imported in which
quantities in relation to their total supply under default assumptions when the
vector and volume can be flexibly chosen (`all imports allowed' in
\cref{fig:sensitivity-bars}). In energy terms, cost-optimal imports comprise
around 45\% carbonaceous fuels, 35\% hydrogen, and less than 10\% electricity.
Noticeably, all primary crude steel and ammonia for fertilizers is imported,
whereby steel imports are preferred over HBI imports. Around half of the total
hydrogen supply is imported, matching the ratio of the 2030 REPowerEU
targets.\cite{europeancommissionRepowerEUPlan} Hydrogen is imported so that it
can be processed into derivative products domestically rather than used for
direct applications for hydrogen. Smaller import shares are observed for
electricity, which is largely supplied from domestic resources, because of
higher costs and losses in electricity transmission than other import vectors,
and for methane, which is supplied from domestic fossil and biogenic sources
(\sfigref{fig:si:balances-a}).

%%% trade flows from origin to destination %%%

In terms of trade flows (\cref{fig:import-shares}C), we observe carbonaceous fuel
imports by ship from South America -- leveraging low transport costs of dense
liquid fuels -- as well as ammonia, steel, and hydrogen imports from the Maghreb
region. Hydrogen is mainly received by pipeline in Spain. Moreover, due to its
proximity to Italy, some electricity imports are received by HVDC connections
from Tunisia. While the model suggests trade routes from particular regions, we
aggregate these to broader regions to emphasize that alternative
origin-destination pairs within the regions could often yield similar results
(\sfigref{fig:si:isc-h2,fig:si:isc-ch4-nh3,fig:si:isc-meoh-ft,fig:si:isc-hbi-St}).

%%% explanation through market values %%%

To explain the import shares in \cref{fig:import-shares}A in more detail, we
compare import costs with average domestic production cost split by cost and
revenue components in \cref{fig:market-values}. First, for the scenario without
imports, imported fuels appear substantially cheaper than domestic production,
which is mostly driven by levelised cost differences of wind and solar
electricity supply. The high demand for hydrogen derivatives
(\sfigref{fig:si:demands}) means that the most attractive domestic potentials
for renewable electricity and captured carbon dioxide have been exhausted.
Consequently, power from wind and solar needs to be produced in regions with
worse capacity factors and higher levelised costs.

%%% hydrogen imports lower pressure on domestic supply chain %%%

Part of this gap is closed when hydrogen imports are allowed. By sourcing
cheaper hydrogen from outside Europe, the domestic costs of derivative fuel
synthesis are reduced. However, the large remaining volume of CO$_2$ handled in
the European system for use and sequestration (\sfigref{fig:si:balances-b})
means that direct air capture is still the price-setting technology for \ce{CO2}
as economic applications for biogenic and industrial carbon capture (i.e.~those
with high full load hours) are depleted.

%%% explanations of low cost differences if all imports allowed %%%

With all import vectors allowed, we see minimal cost differences between
domestic production and imports as the supply curves reach equilibrium
(\sfigref{fig:si:cost-supply-curves}). This is because imports of hydrogen and
derivative products lower the strain on the domestic supply curves for hydrogen
and carbon dioxide. Thereby, domestic production would only ramp up where it
competes with imports and associated infrastructure costs. This was the case for
hydrogen, methanol, and Fischer-Tropsch fuels in the British Isles and parts of
Southern Europe and Nordic countries (\cref{fig:market-values}). Consequently,
not all hydrogen is imported, but some domestic production is retained.

\begin{figure}
    \fullwidthfigure{
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{\linewidth}
        \label{fig:sensitivity-costs:A}
        \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{../workflow/notebooks/20240826-z1/sensitivity-bars-all-wAC.pdf}
    \end{subfigure}
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{\linewidth}
        \label{fig:sensitivity-costs:B}
        \includegraphics[trim=0cm 0cm 0cm 2cm, clip, width=\linewidth]{../workflow/notebooks/20240826-z1/sensitivity-bars-all.pdf}
    \end{subfigure}
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{\linewidth}
        \label{fig:sensitivity-costs:C}
        \includegraphics[trim=0cm 0cm 0cm 2cm, clip, width=\linewidth]{../workflow/notebooks/20240826-z1/sensitivity-bars-all-C.pdf}
    \end{subfigure}
    \caption{\textbf{Effect of import cost variations on system cost savings and import shares with all vectors allowed and unconstrained import volume.}
    In \textbf{A-B}, indicated relative import cost changes are applied uniformly
    to all vectors. In \textbf{C-D}, cost changes are applied uniformly to all
    vectors but electricity imports. In \textbf{E-F}, cost changes are only applied
    to carbonaceous fuels (methane, methanol and Fischer-Tropsch). Top subpanels
    show potential system cost savings compared to the scenario without imports.
    Bottom subpanels show the share and composition of different import vectors
    in relation to total energy system costs. The information is shown both in
    absolute terms and relative terms compared to the scenario without imports.
    Uncertainty ranges in the top subpanels show cost savings (\%) for
    technology assumption years 2030 and 2050, in addition to 2040. All shown
    scenarios allow relocation of crude steel and ammonia production within
    Europe. }
    \label{fig:sensitivity-costs}
    }
\end{figure}

\subsection*{Sensitivity of potential cost savings to import costs}
\label{sec:results-4}

Thus far, the presented findings originate from a central estimate for the
import cost. However, the cost-optimal import mix strongly depends on the
assumed import costs. This uncertainty is addressed in
\cref{fig:sensitivity-costs}. \cref{fig:sensitivity-costs}A highlights the
extensive range in potential cost reductions if higher or lower import costs
could be attained and underlines the resulting variance in cost-effective import
mixes. Within $\pm 30\%$ of the default import costs applied to all carriers,
total cost savings vary between \bneuro{2} (0.3\%) and \bneuro{112} (13.5\%).
Within this range, import volumes vary between 500 and 2646~TWh. Across most
scenarios, there is a stable role for ammonia and liquid carbonaceous fuel
imports. Within a narrower $\pm 20\%$ range, hydrogen imports also appear in
larger quantities, while steel imports become less attractive with cost
increases of 10\% or more. Electricity imports grow with declining costs.

However, not all carriers are equally affected by technology cost variations.
Fuel synthesis technologies do not influence electricity imports, and only
carbon-based fuels are subject to the cost of CO$_2$ supply. We find that when
the relative cost variation is not applied to electricity imports
(\cref{fig:sensitivity-costs}B), they remain less attractive than other
vectors, even when those alternative vectors face a 20\% cost rise.

One central assumption regarding costs for carbon-based fuels is that imported
fuels rely on direct air capture (DAC) as a carbon source. Arguments for this
assumption relate to the potential remoteness of the ideal locations for
renewable fuel production or the absence of industrial point sources in the
exporting region. In contrast, domestic electrofuels can mostly use less
expensive captured biogenic or fossil carbon dioxide from industrial processes.
Therefore, the higher cost for DAC partially cancels out the savings from
utilising better renewable resources abroad. This is one of the reasons why
there is substantial power-to-X production in Europe, even with corresponding
import options. However, the availability of cheaper (biogenic) CO$_2$ in
exporting regions would lower costs of carbonaceous fuel imports
(\stabref{tab:cost-uncertainty}).

When the relative cost variation is only applied to carbon-based fuels
(\cref{fig:sensitivity-costs}C), reflecting cost uncertainty in carbon
provision, hydrogen imports are quickly displaced by Fischer-Tropsch and
methanol imports with falling costs. Only when import costs rise by 20\% do
domestically produced liquid hydrocarbons -- derived mainly from imported
hydrogen -- become more cost-effective than direct imports. In all three cases
of import cost variations, methane imports become relevant only with substantial
cost reductions of 40\%, replacing biogas and residual fossil gas consumption.

Overall, \cref{fig:sensitivity-costs} also demonstrates that the impact of
import cost variations on savings remains stable with more near-term (2030) and
long-term (2050) technology assumptions.

\begin{figure}
    \fullwidthfigure{
    \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{../workflow/notebooks/20240826-z1/sensitivity-import-volume-any.pdf}
    \caption{\textbf{Sensitivity of import volume on total system cost and composition.}
        \textbf{A} Solid lines show the total system cost as a
        function of enforced import volumes for higher (brown scale) or lower
        (blue scale) import costs. The dashed lines indicate the corresponding
        shares of the domestic system cost. The red markers denote the maximum
        cost reductions and cost-optimal import volume for given import cost
        levels (extreme points of the curves). The cost alterations are
        uniformly applied to all imports options but direct electricity imports.
        Steel is included in energy terms applying 2.1 kWh~kg$^{-1}$ as released
        by the oxidation of iron. \textbf{B} shows the composition of
        the total system cost as a function of enforced import volumes for the
        central import cost estimate. The dashed line splits the system costs
        into costs for imports and the domestic system. All shown scenarios use
        technology assumptions for 2040 and allow relocation of crude steel
        and ammonia production within Europe. Cost compositions for the
        alternative import cost scenarios are presented in Supplementary
        Figs.~15-18.}
    \label{fig:sensitivity-volume}
    }
\end{figure}

\subsection*{Attainable cost savings for varying import volumes}
\label{sec:results-5}

What is consistent for many scenarios with higher or lower import costs is the
flat solution space around the respective cost-optimal import volumes.
Increasing or decreasing the total amount of imports from the optimum barely
affects system costs within $\pm 1000$~TWh. This is illustrated in
\cref{fig:sensitivity-volume} and extended
\sfigref{fig:si:volume-higher-1,fig:si:volume-higher-2,fig:si:volume-lower-1,fig:si:volume-lower-2},
which show the system cost as a function of enforced import volumes and
different import costs for hydrogen and its derivatives. A wide range of
scenarios with import volumes below 4100~TWh (2300~TWh for 20\% higher import
costs, 5800~TWh for -20\% lower import costs) have lower total energy system
costs than the no-imports scenario. These ranges of import values are two to
three times as large as the corresponding cost-optimal import volumes, which are
indicated by the red markers in \cref{fig:sensitivity-volume} and correspond to
the bars previously shown in \cref{fig:sensitivity-costs}B. Naturally, the
cost-optimal volume of imports increases as their costs decrease, but with
noticeably varying slopes for system cost savings per unit of additional
imported energy.

As we explore the effect of increasing import volumes on system costs, we find
that already 56\% (48-80\% within $\pm$20\% import costs) of the 4.4\%
(1.3-9.0\%) total cost benefit can be achieved with the first 500 TWh of
imports. This corresponds to 31\% (25-49\%) of the cost-optimal import volumes,
highlighting the diminishing returns of large amounts of energy imports in
Europe. The initial 1000 TWh realise 90\% (80-100\%) of the highest cost
savings, for which primary crude steel and liquid carbonaceous fuel imports are
prioritised, followed by ammonia and hydrogen and, subsequently, larger volumes
of electricity beyond cost-optimal import levels. Once more than 5500~TWh
(5000-8200~TWh) are imported, less than half the total system cost would be
spent on domestic energy infrastructure.

As imports increase, there is a corresponding decrease in the need for domestic
power-to-X (PtX) production and renewable capacities. A large share of the
hydrogen, methanol, and primary steel production is outsourced from Europe,
reducing the need for domestic wind and solar capacities. This trend is further
characterised by the displacement of biogas usage in favour of hydrogen imports
around the 4000~TWh mark (3000-5000~TWh within $\pm$20\% import costs) as demand
for domestic \ce{CO2} utilisation drops and methane use for power and heat
provision is displaced by hydrogen. The increase in hydrogen imports results in
the build-out of more hydrogen fuel cell CHPs for power and heat supply in
district heating networks. Regarding electricity imports from the MENA region,
\cref{fig:sensitivity-volume} reveals a mix of wind and solar power with some
batteries to establish favourable feed-in profiles for the European system
integration and higher utilisation rates for the long-distance HVDC links. For
instance, for imports of 4000~TWh in \cref{fig:sensitivity-volume}, the
capacity-weighted average utilisation rate was 85\%. This is because a
considerable share of the electricity import costs can be attributed to power
transmission.

As import costs are varied, the composition of the domestic system and import
mix for different import volumes is primarily similar
(\sfigref{fig:si:volume-higher-2,fig:si:volume-higher-1,fig:si:volume-lower-1,fig:si:volume-lower-2}).
The main difference is a less prominent role for steel imports with higher
import costs. What is furthermore noteworthy is that reducing import costs from
\mbox{-30\%} to \mbox{-50\%} only marginally reduces domestic infrastructure costs, indicating
largely saturated import potentials. Regarding available import options, the
windows for cost savings are more limited if only subsets are available
(\sfigref{fig:si:volume-subsets}). However, up to an import volume of 1500~TWh
for the central cost estimate, excluding electricity imports or constraining
imports to methanol and Fischer-Tropsch fuels only, would not substantially
diminish the cost-saving potential.

\begin{figure}
    \fullwidthfigure{
    \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{../workflow/notebooks/20240826-z1/infrastructure-map-2x3-A.pdf}
    \caption{\textbf{Layout of European energy infrastructure for different import scenarios.}
        Panels \textbf{A,C,E} show the regional electricity supply mix (pies), added HVDC
        and HVAC transmission capacity (lines), and the siting of battery
        storage (choropleth). Panels \textbf{B,D,F} show the hydrogen supply (top half
        of pies) and consumption (bottom half of pies), net flow and direction
        of hydrogen in newly built pipelines (lines), and the siting of hydrogen
        storage subject to geological potentials (choropleth). Total volumes of
        transmission expansion are given in TWkm, which is the sum product of
        the capacity and length of individual connections. The half circle in
        the Bay of Biscay indicates the imports of hydrogen derivatives that are
        not spatially resolved: ammonia, steel, HBI, methanol, Fischer-Tropsch
        fuels. Hydrogen imports are shown at the entry points. All shown
        scenarios use technology assumptions for 2040, allow steel and
        ammonia relocation and have no import volume constraint (when
        available). Maps for more scenarios are included in Supplementary
        Figs.~26-29. Maps made with Natural Earth.}
    \label{fig:import-infrastructure}
    }
\end{figure}

\subsection*{Interactions of import strategy \& domestic infrastructure}
\label{sec:results-6}

Across the range of import scenarios analysed, we find that the decision which
import vectors are used strongly affects domestic energy infrastructure needs
(\cref{fig:import-infrastructure}).

%%% self-sufficiency %%%

In the fully self-sufficient European energy supply scenario, we see large PtX
production within Europe to cover the demand for hydrogen and hydrogen
derivatives in steelmaking, fertilizers, high-value chemicals, green shipping,
and aviation fuels. Production sites are concentrated mainly in and around the
North and Baltic Seas using wind-based electrolysis and some additional hubs in
Southern Europe using solar-based electrolysis. Electricity grid reinforcements,
representing around 50\% of the current transmission capacity, are focused in
Northwestern Europe, with numerous long-distance HVDC connections, but are
broadly distributed overall.

%%% industry relocation and hydrogen network %%%

With a total of 57~TWkm, the hydrogen pipeline build-out is smaller, mostly
serving regional connections. For several reasons, it is also considerably
smaller than the 204-306~TWkm observed previously in Neumann et
al.~\cite{neumannPotentialRoleHydrogen2023} or the European Hydrogen Backbone
reports\cite{gasforclimateEuropeanHydrogen2022} which envisioned a similar order
of magnitude. Besides assumed full electrification of heavy-duty road
transport\cite{} and assuming low CO$_2$ transport costs from point sources to
low-cost hydrogen sites,\cite{hofmannH2CO2Network2024} one reason is the
considered relocation of crude steel and ammonia production to where hydrogen is
cheap and abundant, reducing the need to transport hydrogen
(\sfigref{fig:si:relocation}). Not considering relocation of primary crude steel
and ammonia production would result in a slightly larger hydrogen network of
71~TWkm (\sfigref{fig:si:infra-b}), while increasing system costs by
\bneuro{2.5} (0.3\%) in the no-imports scenario. With permitted relocation of
ammonia and crude steel production, primary steel production shifts to the
British Isles and Spain while ammonia production moves to the Nordic-Baltic
region. Both sectors become more strongly localized, with individual regions
capturing a market share surpassing 30\%.

However, the main reason why hydrogen consumption is mainly concentrated in
regions with low-cost production is that over 80\% of the hydrogen is used to
produce electrofuels for aviation, shipping, and chemical feedstocks, compared
to about 10\% for crude steel and ammonia production. These liquid fuels can be
transported at a lower cost to airports, ports, and industrial sites across Europe
than hydrogen. Consequently, there is low impetus for transporting hydrogen
directly, resulting in a hydrogen network that is much smaller than envisioned
in the European Hydrogen Backbone \cite{gasforclimateEuropeanHydrogen2022}.

%%% flexible imports %%%

Considering imports of renewable electricity, green hydrogen, and electrofuels
substantially alters the magnitude of energy infrastructure in Europe. Imports
displace much of the European power-to-X production capacities and,
particularly, domestic solar energy generation in Southern Europe. Much of the
remaining derivative fuel synthesis in Southern Spain uses imported hydrogen,
assuming the delivery of captured CO$_2$ from other parts of Europe at low
cost.\cite{hofmannH2CO2Network2024} In contrast, the British Isles retain some
domestic electrolyser capacities to produce synthetic fuels locally. Electricity
imports of 131~TWh, compared to total imports of 1609~TWh, mainly enter from
Tunisia at multiple nodes in Mallorca, Corsica, Sardinia, Sicily, and mainland
Italy. This distribution facilitates grid integration without strong
reinforcement needs in the Italian peninsula.

While the broad regions of domestic power grid reinforcements are not
significantly affected by the import of electricity and other fuels, the volume
of power grid expansion is reduced by 20\%. The reduction in network
infrastructure is even more pronounced with the hydrogen network; the hydrogen
network size is reduced by 70\% with many of the North and East European
connections omitted. Compared to the self-sufficiency scenario, the cost-benefit
of the hydrogen network shrinks from \bneuro{3} (0.4\%) to less than \bneuro{1}
(0.1\%). This is caused by substantial amounts of hydrogen derivative imports or
direct processing of imported hydrogen at the entry points, which diminishes the
demand for hydrogen in Europe and, hence, the need to transport it. With further
10\% cheaper carbonaceous fuel imports, the hydrogen network would then shrink
to 9~TWkm (\sfigref{fig:si:infra-c}).

%%% backup power and power-to-X flexibility value %%%

Changes in the magnitude of domestic PtX production also affect Europe's backup
capacity needs. Less PtX production means lower wind and solar capacities, which
reduces the amount of available generation in dark wind lulls. Next to energy
storage and demand-side management of electric vehicles and heat pumps, the
operational flexibility of electrolysers and derivative fuel production yields
significant benefits for integrating variable wind and solar feed-in and reduces
reserve capacity requirements. In a theoretical scenario without imports where
all PtX processes must run inflexibly at full capacity, system costs rise by
8.8\%. Between the main scenarios with and without imports, we observe that as
imported fuels displace some flexible domestic power-to-X, domestic thermal
backup capacities increase from 129~GW$_\text{el.}$ (no imports allowed) to
276~GW$_\text{el.}$ (all imports allowed). Instead of curtailing the domestic
production of electrofuels, backup power plants need to be dispatched. Most of
these power plants are CHPs fuelled by fossil gas, providing backup heat
alongside backup power when electricity prices are high during winter
(\sfigref{fig:si:backup-power}). The resulting emissions are then compensated
elsewhere in the system through biogenic carbon dioxide removal
(\sfigref{fig:si:balances-b}). Spatially, these are distributed across Central
Europe, while batteries provide backup power in Southern Europe
(\sfigref{fig:si:backup-power-map}). The model leverages Europe's extensive
power grid to widely distribute centralised backup power, even though, in
reality, individual nations may prefer maintaining domestic reserve capacities.

%%% waste heat usage potential %%%

A further observation is the high potential value of PtX waste heat and its role
in siting fuel synthesis plants (\sfigref{fig:si:infra-b},
\sfigref{fig:si:infra-d}). Alongside the flexible operation of electrolysis to
integrate variable wind and solar feed-in and the broad availability of
industrial and biogenic carbon sources in Europe, waste heat usage in district
heating networks is a potential revenue stream that could make electricity and
hydrogen imports with subsequent domestic conversion more attractive relative to
the direct import of derivative products. Our default assumption that only 25\%
of the waste heat can be utilised stems from potential challenges in co-locating
PtX plants with district heating networks within the 115 model regions. If all
waste heat could be leveraged, notable system cost savings of \bneuro{20}
(2.4\%) could be achieved in the no-imports scenario compared to a scenario
where waste heat is fully vented. To realise these benefits, Fischer-Tropsch and
Haber-Bosch plants tend to be geographically distributed where space heating
demand is high (e.g.~Paris or Hamburg) (\sfigref{fig:si:infra-b}), which
increases hydrogen network build-out to 98~TWkm (+72\%) compared to the
reference scenario with 25\% waste heat utilisation. This is not the case for
methanolisation plants, which have lower waste heat potential.

\subsection*{Causes of import cost variations and their effect}
\label{sec:results-7}

\begin{table}
    \fullwidthfigure{
    \footnotesize
    \centering
    \begin{tabular}{lrrrr}
        \toprule
        Cost factor & Absolute change & Unit & Relative change & Unit\\
        \midrule
        Higher WACC of 12\% abroad (e.g.~high project risk) & +48.8 & \euro{}~MWh$^{-1}$  &
        +38.0 & \% \\
        Higher WACC of 10\% abroad (e.g.~high project risk) & +28.6 & \euro{}~MWh$^{-1}$  &
        +22.3 & \% \\
        Higher WACC of 8\% abroad (e.g.~high project risk) & +9.2 & \euro{}~MWh$^{-1}$  & +7.2
        & \% \\
        Higher direct air capture investment cost abroad (+200\%) & +44.3 & \euro{}~MWh$^{-1}$
        & +34.5 & \% \\
        Higher direct air capture investment cost abroad (+100\%) & +22.3 & \euro{}~MWh$^{-1}$
        & +17.4 & \% \\
        Higher direct air capture investment cost abroad (+50\%) & +11.2 & \euro{}~MWh$^{-1}$
        & +8.7 & \% \\
        Higher electrolysis investment cost abroad (+50\%) & +17.3 & \euro{}~MWh$^{-1}$  &
        +13.5 & \% \\
        % Argentina and Chile not available for export & +10.1 & \euro{}~MWh$^{-1}$  &
        % +9.2 & \% \\
        \midrule
        Lower WACC of 3\% abroad (e.g.~government guarantees) & -33.4 & \euro{}~MWh$^{-1}$  &
        -26.0 & \% \\
        Lower WACC of 5\% abroad (e.g.~government guarantees) & -17.5 & \euro{}~MWh$^{-1}$  &
        -13.6 & \% \\
        Lower WACC of 6\% abroad (e.g.~government guarantees) & -8.9 & \euro{}~MWh$^{-1}$  &
        -6.9 & \% \\
        Lower electrolysis investment cost abroad (-50\%) & -18.4 & \euro{}~MWh$^{-1}$  &
        -14.3 & \% \\
        Sell excess curtailed electricity at 50 \euro{}~MWh$^{-1}$ abroad & -8.3 & \euro{}~MWh$^{-1}$  &
        -6.5 & \% \\
        Sell excess curtailed electricity at 30 \euro{}~MWh$^{-1}$ abroad & -4.6 & \euro{}~MWh$^{-1}$  &
        -3.6 & \% \\
        Sell excess curtailed electricity at 10 \euro{}~MWh$^{-1}$ abroad & -1.5 & \euro{}~MWh$^{-1}$  &
        -1.2 & \% \\
        Buy available biogenic or cycled \ce{CO2} for 50 \euro{}~t$^{-1}$ abroad & -20.1 &
        \euro{}~MWh$^{-1}$  & -15.6 & \% \\
        Buy available biogenic or cycled \ce{CO2} for 75 \euro{}~t$^{-1}$ abroad & -13.7 &
        \euro{}~MWh$^{-1}$  & -10.7 & \% \\
        Buy available biogenic or cycled \ce{CO2} for 100 \euro{}~t$^{-1}$ abroad & -7.2 &
        \euro{}~MWh$^{-1}$  & -5.6 & \% \\
        Availability of geological hydrogen storage at 2.1 \euro{}/kWh
        (reduction by 95.5\%) & -5.1
        & \euro{}~MWh$^{-1}$  & -4.0 & \% \\
        Sell power-to-X waste heat at 10 \euro{}~MWh$^{-1}$ abroad  &
        -7.8 & \euro{}~MWh$^{-1}$  & -6.1 & \% \\
        Sell power-to-X waste heat at 5 \euro{}~MWh$^{-1}$ abroad &
        -6.9 & \euro{}~MWh$^{-1}$  & -5.4 & \% \\
        Highly flexible operation of Fischer-Tropsch synthesis (20\% minimum
        part-load) & -3.6 & \euro{}~MWh$^{-1}$  & -2.8 & \% \\
        \bottomrule
    \end{tabular}
    \caption{\textbf{Examples for potential import cost increases or decreases.}
    The table presents cost sensitivities in absolute and relative terms based
    on the supply chain for producing Fischer-Tropsch fuels in Southern
    Argentina for export to Europe (Portugal), using techno-economic assumptions
    for 2040. The reference fuel import cost for this case is
    128.5~\euro{}~MWh$^{-1}$.}
    \label{tab:cost-uncertainty}
    }
\end{table}

In \cref{tab:cost-uncertainty}, we present a breakdown of some potential causes
for import cost variations compared to domestic supply chains relating to
technology costs, financing costs, excess power and heat revenues, fuel
synthesis flexibility, and the availability of geological hydrogen storage and
alternative sources of CO$_2$.

For example, we show that a higher weighted average cost of capital (WACC) than
the uniformly applied 7\%, e.g.~due to higher project financing risks, and lower
WACC, e.g.~due to the government-backing of projects, strongly affect import
costs.\cite{calcaterraReducingCostCapital2024} An increase or decrease by just
one percentage point already alters the unit costs by around $\pm$7\%. Likewise,
technology cost variations abroad for electrolysers and DAC units have a strong
influence. Biogenic CO$_2$ -- or fossil CO$_2$ from industrial processes that is
largely cycled between use and synthesis and, hence, not emitted to the
atmosphere -- can reduce the levelised fuel cost by 16\% if it can be provided
for 50~\euro{}~t$^{-1}$.

By default, we assume islanded fuel synthesis sites, which causes curtailment
rates of 8\%. If surplus electricity production could be sold and absorbed by
the local power grid in exporting regions, additional cost reductions could be
achieved. Furthermore, process integration with waste heat usage and flexible
operation can also reduce fuel cost by 3-6\%. Import costs are also reduced by
4\% where geological hydrogen storage is available by reducing the need for
flexible \mbox{power-to-X} operation.

In contrast, the cost impact is low if the cheapest exporting region withdraws
from the market. Within a cost premium of 10\% in relation to the lowest cost
exporting region, Chile, ten other regions could step in if these regions were
unavailable for exports (\sfigref{fig:si:isc-meoh-ft}).
